"Does the Buddha have the eyes of transcendent intelligence?"
"Yes, the Buddha has the eyes of transcendent intelligence."
"Does the Buddha have the eyes of spiritual intuition?"
"Yes, Blessed One, the Buddha has the eyes of spiritual intuition."
"Does the Buddha have the eyes of love and compassion for all sentient
beings?"
Subhuti agreed and said, "You love all sentient life."
"What do you think, Subhuti? When I referred to the grains of sand in the river
Ganges, did I assert that they were truly grains of sand?"
"No blessed One, you only spoke of them as grains of sand."
"Subhuti, if there were as many Ganges rivers as there are grains of sand in the
river Ganges, and if there were as many buddhalands as there are grains of
sand in all those innumerable rivers, would these buddhalands be considered
numerous?"
"Very numerous indeed."
"Subhuti, I know the mind of every sentient being in all the host of universes,
regardless of any modes of thought, conceptions or tendencies. For all modes,
conceptions and tendencies of thought are not mind. And yet they are called
'mind'. Why? It is impossible to retain a past thought, to seize a future thought,
and even to hold onto a present thought."
The Buddha continued:
"What do you think Subhuti? If a follower were to give away enough treasures to
fill 3,000 universes, would a great blessing and merit incur to him or her?"

Subhuti replied, "Honored one, such a follower would acquire considerable
blessings and merit."
The Buddha said:
"Subhuti, if such a blessing had any substantiality, if it were anything other than a
figure of speech, the Most Honored One would not have used the words
'blessings and merit'."
"Subhuti, what do you think, should one look for Buddha in his perfect physical
body?"
"No, Perfectly Enlightened One, one should not look for Buddha in his perfect
physical body. Why? The Buddha has said that the perfect physical body is not
the perfect physical body. Therefore it is called the perfect physical body."
"Subhuti, what do you think, should one look for Buddha in all his perfect
appearances?"
"No Most Honored One, one should not look for Buddha in all his perfect
appearances. Why? The Buddha has said perfect appearances are not perfect
appearances. Therefore they are called perfect appearances."
"Subhuti, do not maintain that the Buddha has this thought: 'I have spoken
spiritual truths.' Do not think that way. Why? If someone says the Buddha has
spoken spiritual truths, he slanders the Buddha due to his inability to understand
what the Buddha teaches. Subhuti, as to speaking truth, no truth can be spoken.
Therefore it is called 'speaking truth'."
At that time Subhuti, the wise elder, addressed the Buddha, "Most Honored One,
will there be living beings in the future who believe in this Sutra when they hear
it?"
The Buddha said:
"The living beings to whom you refer are neither living beings nor not living
beings. Why? Subhuti, all the different kinds of living beings the Buddha speaks
of are not living beings. But they are referred to as living beings."
Subhuti again asked, "Blessed One, when you attained complete
Enlightenment, did you feel in your mind that nothing had been acquired?"
The Buddha replied:
"That is it exactly, Subhuti. When I attained total Enlightenment, I did not feel, as
the mind feels, any arbitrary conception of spiritual truth, not even the slightest.
Even the words 'total Enlightenment' are merely words, they are used merely as
a figure of speech."
"Furthermore Subhuti, what I have attained in total Enlightenment is the same as
what all others have attained. It is undifferentiated, regarded neither as a high
state, nor a low state. It is wholly independent of any definite or arbitrary
conceptions of an individual self, other selves, living beings, or a universal self."
"Subhuti, when someone is selflessly charitable, they should also practice being
ethical by remembering that there is no distinction between one's self and the
selfhood of others. Thus one practices charity by giving not only gifts, but
through kindness and sympathy. Practice kindness and charity without
attachment and you can become fully enlightened."
"Subhuti, what I just said about kindness does not mean that when someone is
being charitable they should hold onto arbitrary conceptions about kindness, for
kindness is, after all, only a word and charity needs to be spontaneous and
selfless, done without regard for appearances."
The Buddha continued:
"Subhuti, if a person collected treasures as high as 3,000 of the highest mountains
and gave them all to others, their merit would be less than what would accrue
to another person who simply observed and studied this Sutra and, out of
kindness, explained it to others. The latter person would accumulate hundreds of
times the merit, hundreds of thousands of millions of times the merit. There is no
conceivable comparison."
"Subhuti, do not say that the Buddha has the idea, 'I will lead all sentient beings
to Nirvana.' Do not think that way, Subhuti. Why? In truth there is not one single
being for the Buddha to lead to Enlightenment. If the Buddha were to think
there was, he would be caught in the idea of a self, a person, a living being, or
a universal self. Subhuti, what the Buddha calls a self essentially has no self in the
way that ordinary persons think there is a self. Subhuti, the Buddha does not
regard anyone as an ordinary person. That is why he can speak of them as
ordinary persons."
Then the Buddha inquired of Subhuti:
"What do you think Subhuti? Is it possible to recognize the Buddha by the 32
physical marks?"
21
Subhuti replied, "Yes, Most Honored One, the Buddha may thus be recognized."
"Subhuti, if that were true then Chakravartin, the mythological king who also had
the 32 marks, would be called a Buddha."
Then Subhuti, realizing his error, said, "Most Honored One, now I realize that the
Buddha cannot be recognized merely by his 32 physical marks of excellence."
The Buddha then said:
"Should anyone, looking at an image or likeness of the Buddha, claim to know
the Buddha and worship him, that person would be mistaken, not knowing the
true Buddha."
"However, Subhuti, if you think that the Buddha realizes the highest, most fulfilled,
and awakened mind and does not need to have all the marks, you are
mistaken. Subhuti, do not think in that way. Do not think that when one gives rise
to the highest, most fulfilled, and awakened mind, one needs to see all objects
of mind as nonexistent, cut off from life. Please do not think in that way. One
who gives rise to the highest, most fulfilled, and awakened mind does not
contend that all objects of mind are nonexistent and cut off from life. That is not
what I say."
The Buddha continued:
"Subhuti, if someone gives treasures equal to the number of sands on the shores
of the Ganges river, and if another, having realized the egolessness of all things,
thereby understands selflessness, the latter would be more blessed than the one
who practiced external charity. Why? Because great disciples do not see
blessings and merit as a private possession, as something to be gained."
22
Subhuti inquired of the Buddha, "What do you mean 'great disciples do not see
blessings and merit as a private possession'?"
The Buddha replied:
"Because those blessings and merit have never been sought after by those great
disciples, they do not see them as private possessions, but they see them as the
common possession of all beings."
The Buddha said:
"Subhuti, if any person were to say that the Buddha is now coming or going, or
sitting up or lying down, they would not have understood the principle I have
been teaching. Why? Because while the expression 'Buddha’ means 'he who
has thus come, thus gone,' the true Buddha is never coming from anywhere or
going anywhere. The name 'Buddha' is merely an expression, a figure of
speech."
One who has thus gone (tathā-gata) and one who has thus come (tathā-āgata).
The Buddha resumed:
"Subhuti, if any good person, either man or woman, were to take 3,000 galaxies
and grind them into microscopic powder and blow it into space, what do you
think, would this powder have any individual existence?"
"Subhuti replied, "Yes, as a microscopic powder blown into space, it might be
said to have a relative existence, but as you use words, it has no existence. The
words are used only as a figure of speech. Otherwise the words would imply a
belief in the existence of matter as an independent and self-existent thing,
which it is not."
"Furthermore, when the Most Honored One refers to the '3,000 galaxies,' he
could only do so as a figure of speech. Why? Because if the 3,000 galaxies really
existed, their only reality would consist in their cosmic unity. Whether as
microscopic powder or as galaxies, what does it matter? Only in the sense of the
cosmic unity of ultimate being can the Buddha rightfully refer to it."
The Buddha was very pleased with this reply and said:
"Subhuti, although ordinary people have always grasped after an arbitrary
conception of matter and galaxies, the concept has no true basis; it is an illusion
of the mortal mind. Even when it is referred to as 'cosmic unity' it is unthinkable
and unknowable."
The Buddha continued:
"If any person were to say that the Buddha, in his teachings, has constantly
referred to himself, to other selves, to living beings, or to a universal self, what do
you think, would that person have understood my meaning?"
Subhuti replied, "No, blessed One. That person would not have understood the
meaning of your teachings. For when you refer to those things, you are not
referring to their actual existence; you only use the words as figures of speech,
as symbols. Only in that sense can words be used, for (1) conceptions, (2) ideas,
(3) limited truths, and (4) spiritual truths have no more reality than have matter or
phenomena."
Then the Buddha made his meaning even more emphatic by saying:
"Subhuti, when people begin their practice of seeking to attaining total
Enlightenment, they ought to see, to perceive, to know, to understand, and to
realize that all things and all spiritual truths are no-things; and, therefore, they
ought not to conceive within their minds any arbitrary conceptions whatsoever."
Buddha continued:
"Subhuti, if anyone gave to the Buddha an immeasurable quantity of the seven
treasures sufficient to fill the whole universe; and if another person, whether a
man or woman, in seeking to attain complete Enlightenment were to earnestly
and faithfully observe and study even a single section of this Sutra and explain it
to others, the accumulated blessing and merit of that latter person would be far
greater.
"Subhuti, how can one explain this Sutra to others without holding in mind any
arbitrary conception of forms or phenomena or spiritual truths? It can only be
done, Subhuti, by keeping the mind in perfect tranquility and free from any
attachment to appearances.
"So I say to you—This is how to contemplate our conditioned existence in this
fleeting world:
Like a tiny drop of dew, or a bubble floating in a stream;
Like a flash of lightning in a summer cloud,
Or a flickering lamp, an illusion, a phantom, or a dream.
"So is all conditioned existence to be seen."
Thus spoke Buddha
At that time the Buddha said to the bodhisattva Maitreya: "Ajita, after the Thus Come
One has entered extinction, suppose there are monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, or other
persons of wisdom, whether old or young, who, hearing the sutra, respond with joy and,
leaving the Dharma assembly, go to some other place, perhaps a monks quarters, a spot that is
deserted and quiet, a city, a community, the settlement or a village, and there in accordance
with what they have heard they put forth effort and preaching in expounding for the sake of
their parents and relatives, their good friends and acquaintances. These persons, after
hearing, respond with joy and they too set about spreading the teachings. One person, having
heard, responds with joy and spreads the teachings, and the teachings in this way continue to
be handed along from one to another until they reach a fiftieth person.
"Ajita, the benefits received by this fiftieth good man or good woman who responds
with joy I will now describe to you - he must listen carefully.162 Imagine all the beings in the
six paths of existence of four hundred ten thousand million asamkhya worlds, all the four
kinds of living beings, those born from the egg, those born from the womb, those born from
dampness, and those born by transformation, those with form, those without form, those with
thought, those without thought, those who are not with thought, those who are not without
thought, those without legs, those with two legs, four legs or many legs. And imagine that,
among all of this vast number of living beings, a person should come who is seeking blessings
and, responding to their various desires, dispenses objects of amazement and playthings to all
these living beings. Each one of these living beings is given gold, silver, lapis lazuli, seashell,
agate, coral, amber, and other wonderful and precious gems, as well as elephants, horses,
carriages, and palaces and towers made of the seven treasures, enough to fill a whole
Jambudvipa. This great dispenser of charity, having handed out gifts in this manner for a full
eighty years, then thinks to himself: I have already doled out objects of amusement and
playthings to these living beings, responding to various desires. But these living beings are
now old and decrepit, their years over eighty, their hair white, their faces wrinkled, before
long they will die. I now should employ the law of the Buddha to instruct and guide them.
"Immediately he gathers all the living beings together and propagates the Law among
them, teaching, benefiting and delighting them. In one moment all are able to attain the way
of the srota-apanna, the way of the sakridagamin, the way of the anagamin, and the way of
arhat, to exhaust all outflows and enter deeply into meditation. All attain freedom and
become endowed with eight emancipations. Now what is your opinion? Are the benefits
gained by this great dispenser of charity many are not?"
Maitreya said to the Buddha:
"World-Honored One, this man's benefits are very many
indeed, immeasurable and boundless. Even if this dispenser of charity had merely given all
those playthings to living beings, his benefits would still be immeasurable. And how much
more so when he has enabled them to attain the fruits of arhatship!"
The Buddha said to Maitreya: "I will now state the matter clearly for you. This man
gave all these objects of amusement to living beings in the six paths of existence of four
hundred ten thousand million asamkhya worlds and also made it possible for them to attain
the fruits of arhatship. But the benefits that he gains do not match the benefits of the fiftieth
person who hears just one verse of the Lotus Sutra and responds with joy. They are not equal
to one hundredth, one thousandth, one part in a hundred, thousand, ten thousand, a million.
Indeed it is beyond the power of calculation, simile or parable to express the comparison.163
"Ajita, the benefits gained by even the fiftieth person who hears the Lotus Sutra as it is
handed along to him responds with joy. His blessings are greater by an immeasurable,
boundless asamkhya number, and are in fact incomparable.
"Moreover, Ajita, suppose a person for the sake of this sutra visits a monks quarters and,
sitting or standing, even for a moment listens to it and accepts it. As a result of the benefits so
obtained, when he is reborn in his next existence he will enjoy the finest, most superior and
wonderful elephants, horses and carriages, and palanquins decked with rare treasures, and
will mount up to the heavenly palaces.164 Or suppose there is a person who is sitting in the
place where the Law is expounded, and when another person appears, the first person urges
them to sit down and listen, or offers to share his seat and so persuades him to sit down. The
benefits gained by this person will be such that when he is reborn he will be in a place where
lord Shakra is seated, where the heavenly king Brahma is seated, or were a wheel-turning
sage king is seated.165
"Ajita, suppose there is a person who speaks to another person, saying, 'There is a sutra
called the Lotus. Let us go together and listen to it.' And suppose, having been urged, the
other person goes and even for an instant listens to the sutra. The benefits of the first person
will be such that when he is reborn he will be born in the same place as dharani bodhisattvas.
He will have keen faculties and wisdom. For a hundred, a thousand, ten thousand ages he will
never be struck dumb. His mouth will not emit a foul odor. His tongue will never been
afflicted, nor will his mouth be afflicted. His teeth will not be stained or black, nor will they
be yellow or widely spaced, nor will they be missing or fall out or be at an angle or crooked.
His lips will not droop down or curl back or be rough or chapped or afflicted with sores or
misshapen or twisted or too thick or too big or black or discolored or unsightly in any way. His
nose will not be too broad or flat or crooked or too highly arched. His face will not be swarthy,
nor will it be long and narrow, or sunken and distorted. He will not have a single unsightly
feature. His lips, tongue and teeth will all be handsomely proportioned. His nose will be long
and high, his face round and full, his eyebrows long and set high, his forehead broad, smooth,
and well shaped, and he will be endowed with all the features proper to a human being. In
each existence he is born into, he will see the Buddha, hear his Law, and have faith in his
teachings.
"Ajita, just observe! The benefits gained merely by encouraging one person to go and
listen to the Law are such as this! How much more, then, if one single-mindedly hears,
preaches, reads, and recites the sutra and before the great assembly makes distinctions of the
sake of people and practices it as the sutra instructs!"166
At that time the World-Honored One, wishing to state his meaning once more, spoke
in verse form, saying:
If someone in the Dharma assembly is able to hear this sutra, even just one verse, and
responding with joy, preaches it to others, and in this way the teachings are
handed along till they a reach the fiftieth person, the blessings gained by this
last person are such as I will now define.
Suppose there is a great dispenser of charity who bestows goods on immeasurable
multitudes, doing this for a full eighty years, responding to each person's
desires.
Seeing the signs of decrepitude and old age, the white hair and wrinkled face, the
missing teeth, the withered form, he thinks, "Their death is not far off; I must now
teach them so they can gain the fruits of the way!"
Immediately for their sake he employs an expedient means, preaching the true Law of
nirvana:
"Nothing in this world is lasting or firm but all are like bubbles, foam, heat shimmer.
Therefore all of you must quickly learn to hate it and be gone!"
When the people here this Law, all are able to become arhats endowed with the six
transcendental powers, the three understandings and eight emancipations.
But the fiftieth person who hears one verse [of the Lotus sutra] and responds with joy
gains blessings that are far greater, beyond description by simile or parable.
And if one who has had the teachings passed along to him receives blessings that are
immeasurable, how much more so one who in the Dharma assembly first hears
the sutra and responds with joy.
Suppose someone encourages another person, urging him to go and listen to the Lotus,
saying, "This sutra is profound and wonderful, hard to encounter in a thousand,
ten thousand kalpas!"
And suppose, as urged, the person goes to listen, even though he listens for just a
moment.
The blessings that the first person gets in reward I will now describe in detail:
Age after age, no afflictions of the mouth, no teeth missing, yellow or blackened, lips
that are not thick, curled or defective, no fateful features, a tongue not dry,
black or too short; nose high, long and straight, forehead broad, smooth and well
shaped, face and eyes ball properly aligned and impressive, the kind people
delight to look at, breath free of foul odor, a fragrance of utpala flowers
constantly emitted by the mouth.
Suppose one goes to the monks quarters expressly to listen the Lotus Sutra and listens
with joy for just a moment - I will now describe his blessings.
In existences to come among heavenly and human beings he will acquire wonderful
elephants, horses, carriages, palanquins adorned with rare jewels, and will
mount to the palaces of heaven.
If in the place where the law is expounded one encourages someone to sit and hear the
sutra, the blessings he acquires will enable him to gain the seat of Shakra,
Brahma and the wheel-turner.
How much more so if one listens single-mindedly, explains and expounds the meaning,
and practices the sutra as the sutra instructs - that person's blessings know no
bounds
At that time the Buddha said to the bodhisattva and mahasattva Constant Exertion: 'If
good men or good women accept and uphold this Lotus Sutra, if they read it, recite it, explain
and preach it, or transcribe it, such persons will obtain eight hundred eye benefits, twelve
hundred ear benefits, eight hundred nose benefits, twelve hundred tongue benefits, eight
hundred body benefits, and twelve hundred mind benefits. With these benefits they will be
able to adorn their six sense organs, making all of them pure.167
"These good men and good women, with the pure physical eyes they received from
their parents at birth, will view all that exists in the inner and our parts of thousand-million-
fold world, its mountains, forests, rivers and seas, down as far as the Avichi hell and up to this
Summit of Being. And in the midst they will see all the living beings, and also see and
understand all the causes and conditions created by their deeds and the births that await
them as result and recompense for those deeds."168
At that time the World-Honored One, wishing to state his meaning once more, spoke
in verse form, saying:
If in the midst of the great assembly someone with a fearless mind preaches this
Lotus Sutra, listen to the benefits he will receive!
Such a person gains eight hundred benefits of superior eyes.
As a result of these adornments his eyes become extremely pure.
With the eyes received that birth from his parents he will view all the three
thousand worlds, their inner and outer parts, their Mount Meru, their
Sumeru, the Iron Encircling Mountains and all the other mountains and
forests, the waters of their great seas, rivers and streams, down as far as
the Avichi hell, up to the Summit of Being heaven.
And he will see all the living beings in their midst.
Though he has not yet gained heavenly eyes, the power of his physical eyes
will be such as this.
"Moreover, Constant Exertion, if good men or good women accept and uphold this
sutra, if they read it, recite it, explain and preach it, or transcribe it, they will gain twelve
hundred ear benefits with which to purify their ears so they can hear all the different
varieties of words and sounds in the thousand-millionfold world, down as far as the Avichi
hell, up to the Summit of Being, have been in its inner and our parts.169 Elephant sounds, horse
sounds, ox sounds, carriage sounds, weeping sounds, lamenting sounds, conch sounds, drum
sounds, bell sounds, chime sounds, sounds of laughter, sounds of speaking, men's voices,
women's voices, boys' voices, girls' voices, the voice that is not the Law, bitter voices, merry
voices, voices of common mortals, voices of sages, happy voices, unhappy voices, voices of
heavenly beings, dragon voices, yaksha voices, gandharva voices, asura voices, garuda voices,
kimnara voices, mahoraga voices, the sound of fire, the sound of water, the sound of wind,
voices of hell dwellers, voices of beasts, voices of hungry spirits, monks' voices, nuns' voices,
voices of voice hearers, voices of pratyekabuddhas, voices of bodhisattvas and voices of
Buddhas.170 In a word, although the person has not yet gained heavenly ears, with the pure
and ordinary ears that he received at birth from his parents he will be able to hear and
understand all the voices that exist in the inner and outer parts of thousand-millionfold
world. And though in this manner he can distinguish all the various kinds of sounds and
voices, this will not impair his hearing faculty."
t that time the World-Honored One, wishing to state his meaning once more, spoke
in verse form, saying:
With the ears received at birth from one's parents, pure and without stain or
defilement, with these ordinary ears one can hear the sounds of the three
thousand worlds, elephant, horse, carriage, ox sounds, bell, chime, conch, drum
sounds, lute and harp sounds, pipe and flute sounds; the sound of pure and
beautiful singing one can hear without becoming attached to it.
The countless varieties of human voices - one can hear and understand all these.
Again one can hear the voices of heavenly beings, subtle and wonderful song sounds,
and one can hear men and women's voices, the voices of young boys and young
girls.
In the midst of hills, rivers and steep valleys the voice of the kalavinka, the
jivakajivaka and other birds- all these sounds he will hear.
From the tormented multitudes of hell the sounds of various kinds of suffering and
distress, sounds of hungry spirits driven by famine and thirst as they search for
food and drink, of the asuras who live on the shores of the great sea when they
talk among themselves or emit loud cries.
Thus he who preaches the Law can dwell safely among all these, hearing these many
voices from afar without ever impairing his faculties of hearing.
In the worlds of the ten directions when beasts and birds call to another this person
who preaches the Law hears them all from where he is.
In the Brahma heaven and above, the Light Sound Heaven, All Pure heaven, and up to
the Summit of Being heaven, the sounds of the voices talking there - the
teacher of the Law, dwelling here, can hear them all.
All the multitude of monks and all the nuns, whether they are reading or reciting the
scriptures or preaching them for the sake of others - the teacher of the Law
dwells here, can hear them all.
And when there are bodhisattvas who read and recite the sutra teachings or preach
them for the sake of others or select passage and explain their meaning, the
sounds of their voices - he can hear them all.
When the Buddhas, great sages and venerable ones, teach and convert living beings,
in the midst of the great assembly expounding and preaching the subtle and
wonderful Law, one who upholds the Lotus Sutra can hear them all.
All the sounds in the inner and outer parts of the thousand-million-fold world, down
to the Avichi hell, up to the Summit of Being heaven - he can hear all these
sounds and never impair his faculties of hearing.
Because the faculties of his ears or so keen he can distinguish and understand all the
sounds.
One who upholds the Lotus Sutra, though he has not yet gained heavenly ears, can do
this simply through the ears he was born with - such are the benefits he gains.
191
"Moreover, Constant Exertion, if good men or good women accept and uphold this
sutra, if they read it, recite it, explain and preach it, or transcribe it, they will succeed in
gaining eight hundred nose benefits with which to purify their faculty of smell so they can
detect all the different fragrances from top to bottom and in the inner and our parts of a
thousand-million-fold world, the fragrance of sumana flowers, jatika flowers, mallika flowers,
champaka flowers, patala flowers, red lotus flowers, blue lotus flowers, white lotus flowers, the
fragrance of flowering trees, fruit trees, sandalwood, aloes, tamalapatra and tagara, as well as
incense blended from thousand, ten thousand ingredients, powdered incense, pellet incense
or paste incense.171 One who upholds this sutra while dwelling here, will be able to
distinguish all these.
"Moreover he will be able to distinguish and identify the odors of living beings, of
elephants, horses, oxen, sheep and so forth, the odor of a man, a woman, a boy child, a girl
child, and odors of plants, trees, thickets and forests. Whether they are near or far off, he will
be able to detect all these odors and distinguish one from the other without error.
"One who upholds this sutra, though he dwells right here, will also be able to detect
orders of the various heavens in the sky above.172 The scent of a parijataka and kovidara trees,
of mandarava flowers, great mandarava flowers, great manjushaka flowers, sandalwood,
aloes, various kinds of powdered incense, and incense made of an assortment of flowers - of
heavenly scents from which they are derived or blended, there are non that he cannot detect
and identify.
"He will also be able to detect the scent of the bodies of heavenly beings. The scent
when Shakra Devanam Indra is in his superb palace amusing himself and satisfying the five
desires, or the scent when he is in the Hall of the Wonderful Law preaching the Law for the
heavenly beings of Trayastrimsha, or the scent when he is wondering at leisure in his gardens,
as well as the scent of the bodies of the other male and female heavenly beings - all these he
The Bodhisattva of Compassion,
When he meditated deeply,
Saw the emptiness of all five
skandhas
And sundered the bonds that caused
him suffering.
Here then,
Form is no other than emptiness,
Emptiness no other than form.
Form is only emptiness,
Emptiness only form.
Feeling, thought, and choice,
Consciousness itself,
Are the same as this.
All things are by nature void
They are not born or destroyed
Nor are they stained or pure
Nor do they wax or wane
So, in emptiness, no form,
No feeling, thought, or choice,
Nor is there consciousness.
No eye, ear, nose, tongue, body,
mind;
No colour, sound, smell, taste,
touch,
Or what the mind takes hold of,
Nor even act of sensing.
No ignorance or end of it,
Nor all that comes of ignorance;
No withering, no death,
No end of them.
Nor is there pain, or cause of pain,
Or cease in pain, or noble path
To lead from pain;
Not even wisdom to attain!
Attainment too is emptiness.
So know that the Bodhisattva
Holding to nothing whatever,
But dwelling in Prajna wisdom,
Is freed of delusive hindrance,
Rid of the fear bred by it,
And reaches clearest Nirvana.
All Buddhas of past and present,
Buddhas of future time,
Using this Prajna wisdom,
Come to full and perfect vision.
Hear then the great dharani,
The radiant peerless mantra,
The Prajnaparamita
Whose words allay all pain;
Hear and believe its truth!
Gate Gate Paragate Parasamgate
Bodhi Svaha
Gate Gate Paragate Parasamgate
Bodhi Svaha
Gate Gate Paragate Parasamgate
Bodhi Svaha
