THUS HAVE I HEARD. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, AnathapiD<;lika's Park. There he
addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this:
2. "Bhikkhus, I shall teach you a discourse on the restraint of
all the taints. 32 [7] Listen and attend closely to what I shall say."
- "Yes, venerable sir," the bhikkhus replied. The Blessed One
said this
Bhikkhus, I say that the destruction of the taints is for one
who knows and sees, not for one who does not know and see.
Who knows and sees what? Wise attention and unwise atten-
tion. 33 When one attends unwisely, una risen taints arise and
arisen taints increase. When one attends wisely, unarisen taints
do not arise and arisen taints are abandoned.
4. "Bhikkhus, there are taints that should be abandoned by
seeing. There are taints that should be abandoned by restrain-
ing. There are taints that should be abandoned by using. There
are taints that should be abandoned by enduring. There are
taints that should be abandoned by avoiding. There are taints
that should be abandoned by removing. There 
What taints, bhikkhus, should be abandoned by seeing?35
Here, bhikkhus, an untaught ordinary person, who has no
regard for noble ones and is unskilled and undisciplined in their
92 Sabbllsava Sutta: Sutta 2 i 8
Dhamma, who has no regard for true men and is unskilled and
undisciplined in their Dhamma, does not understand what
things are fit for attention and what things are unfit for atten-
tion. Since that is so, he attends to those things unfit for atten-
tion and he does not attend to those things fit for attention.36
6. "What are the things unfit for attention that he attends to?
They are things such that when he attends to them, the unarisen
taint of sensual desire arises in him and the arisen taint of
sensual desire increases, the una risen taint of being arises in him
and the arisen taint of being increases, the unarisen taint of igno-
rance arises in him and the arisen taint of ignorance increases.
These are the things unfit for attention that he attends to.37 And
what are the things fit for attention that he does not attend to?
They are things such that when he attends to them, the una risen
taint of sensual desire does not arise in him and the arisen taint
of sensual desire is abandoned, the unarisen taint of being does
not arise in him and the arisen taint of being is abandoned,the
unarisen taint of ignorance does not arise in him and the arisen
taint ~f ignorance is abandoned. These are the things fit for
atte~tlOn that ~e does not attend to. [8] By attending to things
~nflt for attentIon and by not attending to things fit for atten-
tIon, both unarisen taints arise in him and arisen taints increase.
7.."This is how he attends unwisely: 'Was I in the past? Was I
not ~ the past? What was I in the past? How was I in the past?
Havmg been what, what did I become in the past? Shall I be in
the future? Shall I not be in the future? What shall I be in the
future? How shall I be in th'e future? Having been what, what
shall I become in the future?' Or else he is inwardly perplexed
about the present thus: 'Am I? Am I not? What am I? How am I?
Where has this being come from? Where will it gO?'38
8. "When he attends unwisely in this way, one of six views
arises in him. 39 The view 'self exists for me' arises in him as true
and established; or the view 'no self exists for me' arises in him
as true and established; or the view 'I perceive self with self
arises in him as true and established; or the view 'I perceive not-
self with self' arises in him as true and established; or the view 'I
perceive self with not-self' arises in him as true and established;
or else he has some such view as this: 'It is this self of mine
that speaks and feels and experiences here and there the result
of good and bad actions; but this self of mine is permanent,
All the Taints 93
i9
--------------------------------------
everlasting, eternal, not subject to change, and it wi~l endure as
long as eterruty.'40 This speculative vie~, bhikkhus, IS call~d the
thicket of views, the wilderness of VIews, the contortIon of
viewS, the vacillation of views, the fetter of views. Fettered by
the fetter of views, the untaught ordinary person is not freed
from birth, ageing, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain,
grief, and despair; he is not freed from suffering, I say.
9. "Bhikkhus, a well-taught noble disciple, who has regard for
noble ones and is skilled and disciplined in their Dharnma, who
has regard for true men and is skilled and . disciplined. in their
Dhamma, understands what things are fIt for attentIon and
what things are unfit for attention. Since that is so, [9] he does
not attend to those things unfit for attention and he attends to
L
those things fit for attention. .
10. "What are the things unfit for attention that he does not
attend to? They are things such that when he attends to them,
the una risen taint of sensual desire arises in him .. .(as §6) ... and
the arisen taint of ignorance increases. These are the things unfit
for attention that he does not attend to. And what are the things
fit for attention that he attends to? They are things such that
when he attends to them, the unarisen taint of sensual desire
does not arise in him ... (as §6) .. . and the arisen taint of ignorance
is abandoned. These are the things fit for attention that he
attends to. By not attending to things unfit for attention and by
attending to things fit for attention, unarisen taints do not arise
in him and arisen taints are abandoned.
11. "He attends wisely: 'This is suffering'; he attends wisely:
'This is the origin of suffering'; he attends wisely: 'This is the
cessation of suffering'; he attends wisely: 'This is the way lead-
ing to the cessation of suffering.'41 When he attends wisely in
this way, three fetters are abandoned in him: personality view,
doubt and adherence to rules and observances. These are called
the taints that should be abandoned by seeing.
12. "What taints, bhikkhus, should be abandoned by restrain-
ing?43 Here a bhikkhu, reflecting wisely, abides with the eye fac-
ulty restrained. While taints, vexation, and fever might arise in
94 Sabbiisava Sutta: Sutta 2 i 10
taints, vexation, or fever in one who abides with the eye faculty
restrained. 44 Reflecting wisely, he abides with the ear faculty
restrained ... with the nose faculty restrained ... with the tongue fac-
ulty restrained ... with the body faculty restrained ... with the mind
faculty restrained ... While taints, vexation, and fever might arise
in one who abides with the faculties unrestrained, [10] there are
no taints, vexation, or fever in one who abides with the faculties
restrained. These are called the taints that should be abandoned
by restraining.
(TAINTS TO BE ABANDONED BY USING)
13. "What taints, bhikkhus, should be abandoned by using?4S
Here a bhikkhu, reflecting wisely, uses the robe only for protec-
tion from cold, for protection from heat, for protection from con-
tact with gadflies, mosquitoes, wind, the sun, and creeping
things, and only for the purpose of concealing the private parts.
14. "Reflecting wisely, he uses almsfood neither for amusement
nor for intoxication nor for the sake of physical beauty and attrac-
tiveness, but only for the endurance and continuance of this body,
for ending discomfort, and for assisting the holy life, considering:
'Thus I shall terminate old feelings without arousing new feelings
and I shall be healthy and blameless and shall live in comfort.'
15. "Reflecting wisely, he uses the resting place only for pro-
tection from cold, for protection from heat, for protection from
contact with gadflies, mo~quitoes, wind, the sun, and creeping
things, and only for the purpose of warding off the perils of cli-
mate and for enjoying retreat.
16. "Reflecting wisely, he uses the medicinal requisites only
for protection from arisen afflicting feelings and for the benefit
of good health.
17. "While taints, vexation, and fever might arise in one who
does not use the requisites thus, there are no taints, vexation, or
fever in one who uses them thus. These are called the taints that
should be abandoned by using.
What taints, bhikkhus, should be abandoned by enduring?
Here a bhikkhu, reflecting wisely, bears cold and heat, hunger and
ill All the Taints 95
thirst, and contact with gadflies, mosquitoes, wind, the sun, and
creeping things; he endures ill~spoken, unwelcome ~o~ds a~d
arisen bodily feelings that are p~, ra~king, s~arp,. plercmg, ~lS
agreeable, distressing, and menacmg to life. While tamts, vexa~on,
and fever might arise in one who does not endure such things,
there are no taints, vexation, or fever in one who endures ~em.
These are called the taints that should be abandoned by endurmg.
(TAINTS TO BE ABANOONED BY AVOIDING)
19. "What taints, bhikkhus, should be abandoned by avoid~g?
Here a bhikkhu, reflecting wisely, avoids a wild elephant, a wlld
horse, a wild bull, a wild dog, a snake, a stump, ~1l] a ?ramble
patch, a chasm, a cliff, a cesspit, a sewer. Re~ectmg w1Se~y, he
avoids sitting on unsuitable seats, wandenng to unsUltable
resorts,46 and associating with bad friends, since if he ,:ere to d?
so wise companions in the holy life might su~pect h~m ?f evil
conduct. While taints, vexation, and fever mIght anse 111 one
who does not avoid these things, there are no taints, vexa~on,
and fever in one who avoids them. These are called the tamts
that should be abandoned by avoiding.
(TAINTS TO BE ABANDONED BY REMOVING)
. ?
20. "What taints, bhikkhus, should be abandoned by removmg.
Here a bhikkhu, reflecting wisely, does not tolerate an arisen
thought of sensual desire; he abandons it, removes it, does away
with it and annihilates it. He does not tolerate an arisen thought
of ill'will ... He does not tolerate an arisen thought of
cruelty ... He does not tolerate arisen evil unw~olesome states; h~
abandons them removes them, does away WIth them, and anru-
hilates them. 47 ~le taints, vexation, and fever might arise in
one who does not remove these thoughts, there are no taints,
vexation, or fever in one who removes them. These are called
the taints that should be abandoned by removing.
(TAINTS TO BE ABANDONED BY DEVELOPING)
21. "What taints, bhikkhus, should be abandoned by developing?
Here a bhikkhu, reflecting wisely, develops the mindfulness
1. THUS HAVE I HEARD. 1 On one occasion the Blessed One was
living in UkkaHha in the Subhaga Grove at the root of a royal
sala tree. There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus."2-
"Venerable sir," they replied. The Blessed One said this:
2. "Bhikkhus, I shall teach you a discourse on the root of all
things. 3 Listen and attend closely to what I shall say." - "Yes,
venerable sir," the bhikkhus replied. The Blessed One said this:
(THE ORDINARY PERSON)
3. "Here, bhikkhus, an untaught ordinary person,4 who has no
regard for noble ones and is unskilled and undisciplined in their
Dhamma, who has no regard for true men and is unskilled and
undisciplined in their Dhamma, perceives earth as earth. 5
Having perceived earth as earth, he conceives [himself as] earth,
he conceives [himself] in earth, he conceives [himself apart]
from earth, he conceives earth to be 'mine,' he delights in earth. 6
Why is that? Because he has not fully understood it, I say?
4. "He perceives water as water. Having perceived water as
water, he conceives [himself as] water, he conceives [himself] in
water, he conceives [himself apart] from water, he conceives
water to be 'mine,' he delights in water. Why is that? Because he
has not fully understood it, I say.
5. "He perceives fire as fire. Having perceived fire as fire, he
conceives [himself as] fire, he conceives [himself] in fire, he con-
ceives [himself apart] from fire, he conceives fire to be 'mine,' he
delights in fire. Why is that? Because he has not fully under-
stood it, I say.
6. "He perceives air as air. Having perceived air as air, he con-
ceives [himself as] air, he conceives [himself] in air, he conceives
[himself apart] from air, he conceives air to be 'mine,' he
delights in air. Why is that? Because he has not fully understood
it, I say. [2]
7. "He perceives beings as beings. 8 Having perceived beings
as beings, he conceives beings, he conceives [himself] in beings,
he conceives [himself apart] from beings, he conceives beings to
be 'mine,' he delights in beings. Why is that? Because he has not
fully understood it, I say.
8. "He perceives gods as gods. 9 Having perceived gods as
gods, he conceives gods, he conceives [himself] in gods, he con-
ceives [himself apart] from gods, he conceives gods to be 'mine,'
he delights in gods. Why is that? Because he has not fully under-
stood it, I say.
9. "He perceives Pajapati as Pajapati.lO Having perceived
Pajapati as Pajapati, he conceives Pajapati, he conceives [him-
self] in Pajapati, he conceives [himself apart] from Pajapati, he
conceives Pajapati to be 'mine,' he delights in Pajapati. Why is
that? Because he has not fully understood it, I say.
10. "He perceives Brahma as BrahmaY Having perceived
Brahma as Brahma, he conceives Brahma, he conceives [himself]
in Brahma, he conceives [himself apart] from Brahma, he con-
ceives Brahma to be 'mine,' he delights in Brahma. Why is that?
Because he has not fully understood it, I say.
11. "He perceives the gods of Streaming Radiance as the gods
of Streaming RadianceY Having perceived the gods of
Streaming Radiance as the gods of Streaming Radiance, he con-
ceives the gods of Streaming Radiance, he conceives [himself] in
the gods of Streaming Radiance, he conceives [himself apart]
from the gods of Streaming Radiance, he conceives the gods of
Streaming Radiance to be 'mine,' he delights in the gods of
Streaming Radiance. Why is that? Because he has not fully
understood it, I say.
12. "He perceives the gods of Refulgent Glory as the gods of
Refulgent Glory.13 Having perceived the gods of Refulgent
Glory as the gods of Refulgent Glory, he conceives the gods of
Refulgent Glory, he conceives [himself] in the gods of Refulgent
Glory, he conceives [himself apart] from the gods of Refulgent
Glory, he conceives the gods of Refulgent Glory to be 'mine,' he
delights in the gods of Refulgent Glory. Why is that? Because he
has not fully understood it, I say
"He perceives the gods of Great Fruit as the gods of Great
Fruit. 14 Having perceived the gods of Great Fruit as the gods of
Great Fruit, he conceives the gods of Great Fruit, he conceives
[himself] in the gods of Great Fruit, he conceives [himself apart]
from the gods of Great Fruit, he conceives the gods of Great
Fruit to be 'mine,' he delights in the gods of Great Fruit. Why is
that? Because he has not fully understood it, I say.
14. "He perceives the Overlord as the Overlord. ls Having per-
ceived the Overlord as the Overlord, he conceives the Overlord,
he conceives [himself] in the Overlord, he conceives [himself
apart] from the Overlord, he conceives the Overlord to be
'mine,' he delights in the Overlord. Why is that? Because he has
not fully understood it, I say.
15. "He perceives the base of infinite space as the base of infi-
nite space. 16 Having perceived the base of infinite space as the
base of infinite space, he conceives [himself as] the base of infi-
nite space, he conceives [himself] in the base of infinite space, he
conceives [himself apart] from the base of infinite space, he con-
ceives the base of infinite space to be 'mine,' he delights in the
base of infinite space. Why is that? Because he has not fully
understood it, I say.
16. "He perceives the base of infinite consciousness as the
base of infinite consciousness. Having perceived the base of
infinite consciousness as the base of infinite consciousness, [3]
he conceives [himself as] the base of infinite consciousness, he
conceives [himself] in the base of infinite consciousness, he con-
ceives [himself apart] from the base of infinite consciousness, he
conceives the base of infinite consciousness to be 'mine,' he
delights in the base of infinite consciousness. Why is that?
Because he has not fully understood it, I say.
17. "He perceives the base of nothingness as the base of noth-
ingness. Having perceived the base of nothingness as the base of
nothingness, he conceives [himself as] the base of nothingness, he
conceives [himself] in the base of nothingness, he conceives [him-
self apart] from the base of nothingness, he conceives the base of
nothingness to be 'mine,' he delights in the base of nothingness.
Why is that? Because he has not fully understood it, I say.
18. "He perceives the base of neither-perception-nor-non-
perception as the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
Having perceived the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception
as the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, he conceives
[himself as] the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception,
he conceives [himself] in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-
perception, he conceives [himself apart] from the base of
neither-perception-nor-non-perception, he conceives the base of
neither-perception-nor-non-perception to be 'mine,' he delights
in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception. Why is
that? Because he has not fully understood it, I say.
19. "He perceives the seen as the seenP Having perceived the
seen as the seen, he conceives [himself as] the seen, he conceives
[himself] in the seen, he conceives [himself apart] from the seen,
~e conceives the seen to be 'mine,' he delights in the seen. Why
IS that? Because he has not fully understood it, I say.
20. "He perceives the heard as the heard. Having perceived
the heard as the heard, he conceives [himself as] the heard, he
conceives [himself] in the heard, he conceives [himself apart]
from the heard, he conceives the heard to be 'mine,' he delights
in the heard. Why is that? Because he has not fully understood
it, I say.
21. "He perceives the sensed as the sensed. Having perceived
the sensed as the sensed, he conceives [himself as] the sensed, he
conceives [himself] in the sensed, he conceives [himself apart]
from the sensed, he conceives the sensed to be 'mine,' he
delights in the sensed. Why is that? Because he has not fully
understood it, I say.
22. "He perceives the cognized as the cognized. Having per-
ceived the cognized as the cognized, he conceives [himself as]
the cognized, he conceives [himself] in the cognized, he con-
c~ives [himself apart] from the cognized, he conceives the cog-
nIzed to be 'mine,' he delights in the cognized. Why is that?
Because he has not fully understood it, I say.
~3. "He perceives unity as unity.tB Hav.ing perceived unity as
unIty, he conceives [himself as] unity, he conceives [himself] in
unity, he conceives [himself apart] from unity, he conceives
unity to be 'mine,' he delights in unity. Why is that? Because he
has not fully understood it, I say.
24. "He perceives diverSity as diversity. Having perceived
diversity as diversity, he conceives [himself as] diversity, he
conceives [himself] in diversity, he conceives [himself apart)
from diversity, he conceives diversity to be 'mine,' he delights
in diversity. Why is that? Because he has not fully understood
it, I say.
25. "He perceives all as all. 19 Having perceived all as all, he
L
conceives [himself as) all, [4] he conceives [himself] in all, he
conceives [himself apart] from all, he conceives all to be 'mine,'
he delights .in all. Why is that? Because he has not fully under-
stood it, I say.
26. "He perceives Nibbana as Nibbana. 20 Having perceived
Nibbana as Nibbana, he conceives [himself asl Nibbana, he
conceives [himself] in Nibbana, he conceives [himself apartl
from Nibbana, he conceives Nibbana to be 'mine,' he delights
in Nibbana. Why is that? Because he has not fully understood
it, I say
Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who is in higher training,21 whose
mind has not yet reached the goal, and who is still aspiring to
the supreme security from bondage, directly knows earth as
earth.22 Having directly known earth as earth, he should not
conceive [himself as) earth, he should not conceive [himself) in
earth, he should not conceive [himself apart) from earth, he
should not conceive earth to be 'mine,' he should not delight in
earth. Why is that? So that he may fully understand it, I say.23
28-49. "He directly knows water as water ... He directly knows
all as all ...
50. "He directly knows Nibbana as Nibbana. Having directly
known Nibbana as Nibbana, he should not conceive [himself as)
Nibbana, he should not conceive [himselfl in Nibbana, he
should not conceive [himself apart) from Nibbana, he should
not conceive Nibbana to be 'mine,' he should not delight in
Nibbana. Why is that? So that he may fully understand it, I say.
"Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who is an arahant with taints
destroyed, who has lived the holy life, done what had to be
done, laid down the burden, reached the true goal, destroyed
the fetters of being, and is completely liberated
1. THUS HAvE I HEARD. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing in SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapi1:\(;iika's Park. There he
addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus."sl - "Venerable sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this: .. .
2. "Bhikkhus, be my heirs in Dhamma, not my heIrS In matenal
things. Out of compassion for you I have thoug~t: '.How sh~ll
my disciples be my heirs in Dhamma, not my heIrS In ma~en~l
things?' If you are my heirs in material things, not ~y ~eI~s In
Dhamma, you will be reproached thus: 'The Teacher s dIscIples
live as his heirs in material things, not as heirs in Dhamma'; and
I will be reproached thus: 'The Teacher's disciples live as his
heirs in material things, not as his heirs in Dhamma.'
"If you are my heirs in Dhamma, not .my ~eirs in .mat;rial
things, you will not be reproached [as It WIll be saId): T~e
Teacher's disciples live as his heirs in Dhamma, not as his heIrS
in material things'; and I will not be reproached [as it will be
said]: 'The Teacher's disciples live as his heirs in Dhamma, ~ot
as his heirs in material things.' Therefore, bhikkhus, be my heIrs
in Dhamma, not my heirs in material things. Out of compassi~n
for you I have thought: 'How shall my disciples be my heirs In
/ Dhamma, not my heirs in material things?'
3. "Now, bhikkhus, suppose that I had eaten, refused more
food, had my fill, finished, had enough, had what I needed, and
some almsfood was left over to be thrown away. Then two
bhikkhus arrived [13] hungry and weak, and I told them:
'Bhikkhus, I have eaten ... had what I needed, but there is this
almsfood of mine left over to be thrown away. Eat if you like; if
you do not eat then I shall throw it away where there is no
greenery or drop it into water where there is no life.' Then one
bhikkhu thought: 'The Blessed One has eaten ... had what he
97
/
98 Dhammadayada Sutta: Sutta 3 i 14
needed, but there is this almsfood of the Blessed One left over to
be thrown away; if we do not eat it the Blessed One will throw it
away ... But this has been said by the Blessed One: "Bhikkh b
h· . Oha us, e
my eirs I~ mma, not my heirs in material things." Now this
al~foo~ IS one of the material things. Suppose that instead of
eatin? this almsfood I pass the night and day hungry and weak.'
And InStead of eating that almsfood he passed that night and day
hungry and weak. Then the second bhikkhu thought: 'The Blessed
One has eaten ... had what he needed, but there is this almsfood of
th~ Blessed One left over to be thrown away ... Suppose that I eat
thIS almsfood and pass the night and day neither hungry nor
weak.' ~nd after eating that almsfood he passed the night and
da~ neIther hungry nor weak. Now although that bhikkhu by
eating that almsfo?d passed the night and day neither hungry
nor weak, yet the flISt bhikkhu is more to be respected and com-
me~ded by me. Why is that? Because that will for long conduce
to his fewness of wishes, contentment, effacement, easy support,
and arousal of ener.gy .. 52 Therefore, bhikkhus, be my heirs in
Ohamma, not my heIrS m material things. Out of compassion for
you I have thought: 'How shall my disciples be my heirs in
Ohamma, ~ot my heirs in material things?'"
4 ..That IS what the Blessed One said. Having said this, the
SublIme One rose from his seat and went into his dwelling. Soon
after he had left, the venerable Sariputta addressed the bhikkh
thus: "Friends, bhikkhus." - "Friend," they replied. [14] T~;
venerable Sariputta said this:
5. "Friends, in what way do disciples of the Teacher who lives
secluded not train. in seclusion? And in what way do disciples of
the Teacher who hves secluded train in seclusion?"
"Indeed, friend, we would come from far away to learn from
the vene~able Sariputta the meaning of this statement. It would
be. good If the venera~le Sariputta would explain the meaning of
thIS statement. HaVing heard it from him the bhikkhus will
remember it."
::Then, ~rien~~, listen ~nd attend closely to what I shall say."
. Yes: fnend, the bhIkkhus replied. The venerable Sariputta
saId thIS:
6. "Friends, in what way do diSciples of the Teacher who lives
s.ecluded not train in seclusion? Here diSciples of the Teacher who
lIves secluded do not train in seclusion; they do not abandon
l
i 15 Heirs in Dhamma 99
what the Teacher tells them to abandon; they are luxurious and
careless, leaders in backsliding, neglectful of seclusion.
"In this the elder bhikkhus are to be blamed for three rea-
sons. 53 As disciples of the Teacher who lives secluded they do
not train in seclusion: they are to be blamed for this first reason.
They do not abandon what the Teacher tells them to abandon:
they are to be blamed for this second reason. They are luxurious
and careless, leaders in backsliding, neglectful of seclusion: they
are to be blamed for this third reason. The elder bhikkhus are to
be blamed for these three reasons.
"In this the middle bhikkhus are to be blamed for three rea-
sons. As disciples of the Teacher who lives secluded they do not
train in seclusion: they are to be blamed for this first reason.
They do not abandon what the Teacher tells them to abandon:
they are to be blamed for this second reason. They are luxurious
and careless, leaders in backsliding, neglectful of seclusion: they
are to be blamed for this third reason. The middle bhikkhus are
to be blamed for these three reasons.
"In this the new bhikkhus are to be blamed for three reasons.
As disciples of the Teacher who lives secluded they do not train
in seclusion: they are to be blamed for this first reason. They do
not abandon what the Teacher tells them to abandon: they are to
be blamed for this second reason. They are luxurious and care-
less, leaders in backsliding, neglectful of seclusion: they are to be
blamed for this third reason. The new bhikkhus are to be
blamed for these three reasons.
"It is in this way that disciples of the Teacher who lives
secluded do not train in seclusion.
7. "In what way, friends, do disciples of the Teacher who
lives secluded [15] train in seclusion? Here disciples of the
Teacher who lives secluded train in seclusion; they abandon
what the Teacher tells them to abandon; they are not luxurious
and careless, they are keen to avoid backsliding, and are leaders
in seclusion.
"In this the elder bhikkhus are to be commended for three
reasons. As disciples of the Teacher who lives secluded they
train in seclusion: they are to be commended for this first rea-
son. They abandon what the Teacher tells them to abandon:
they are to be commended for this second reason. They are not
luxurious and careless; they are keen to avoid backsliding 
100 Dhammadayada Sutta: Sutta 3 i 16
are leaders in seclusion: they are to be commended for this
third reason. The elder bhikkhus are to be commended for
these three reasons.
"In this the middle bhikkhus are to be commended for three
reasons. As disciples of the Teacher who lives secluded they
train in seclusion: they are to be commended for this first rea-
son. They abandon what the Teacher tells them to abandon: they
are to be commended for this second reason. They are not luxu-
rious and careless; they are keen to avoid backsliding and are
leaders in seclusion: they are to be commended for this third
reason. The middle bhikkhus are to be commended for these
three reasons.
"In this the new bhikkhus are to be commended for three
reasons. As disciples of the Teacher who lives secluded they
train in seclusion: they are to be commended for this first rea-
son. They abandon what the Teacher tells them to abandon:
they are to be commended for this second reason. They are not
luxurious and careless; they are keen to avoid backsliding and
are leaders in seclusion: they are to be commended for this
third reason. The new bhikkhus are to be commended for these
three reasons.
"It is in this way that disciples of the Teacher who lives
secluded train in seclusion.
8. "Friends, the evil herein is greed and hate. 54 There is a
Middle Way for the abandoning of greed and hate, giving
vision, giving knowledge, wl}ich leads to peace, to direct knowl-
edge, to enlightenment, to Nibbana. And what is that Middle
Way? It is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view,
right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. This is the
Middle Way giving vision, giving knowledge, which leads to
peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to Nibbana. 55
9-15. "The evil herein is anger and revenge ... contempt and a
domineering attitude ... envy and avarice ... deceit and fraud ... ob-
stinacy [16] and presumption ... conceit and arrogance ... vanity
and negligence. There is a Middle Way for the abandoning of
vanity and negligence, giving vision, giving knowledge, which
leads to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to
Nibbana. And what is that Middle Way? It is just this Noble
Eightfold Path; that is, right view, right intention, right speech,
i 16 Heirs in Dhamma 101
right action, right livelihood, right effort, right ~~dfu~ess, a~d
right concentration. This is the Middle Way glvmg VISIOn, gIV-
ing knowledge, which leads to peace, to direct knowledge, to
enlightenment, to Nibbana./I
That is what the venerable Sariputta said. The bhikkhus were
satisfied and delighted in the venerable Sariputta's words.
1. THUS HAVE I HEARD. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, AnathapU:t9ik a's Park.
2. Then the brahmin JaI).ussoI)i56 went to the Blessed One and
exchanged greetings with him. When this courteous and ami-
able talk was finished, he sat down at one side and said: "Master
Gotama, when clansmen have gone forth from the home life into
homelessness out of faith in Master Gotama, do they have
Master Gotama for their leader, their helper, and their guide?
And do these people follow the example of Master Gotama?"57
"That is so, brahmin, that is so. When clansmen have gone
forth from the home life into homelessness out of faith in me
they have me for their leader, their helper, and their guide. And
these people follow my example."
"But, Master Gotama, remote jungle-thicket resting places in
the forest are hard to endure, seclusion is hard to practise, and it
is hard to enjoy solitude. One would think the jungles must rob
a bhikkhu of his mind, if he has no concentration." [17]
"That is so, brahmin, that is so. Remote jungle-thicket resting
places in the forest are hard to endure, seclusion is hard to prac-
tise, and it is hard to enjoy solitude. One would think the jungles
must rob a bhikkhu of his mind, if he has no concentration.
3. "Before my enlightenment, while I was still only an unen-
lightened Bodhisatta, I too considered thus: 'Remote jungle-thick-
et resting places in the forest are hard to endure ... the jungles
must rob a bhikkhu of his mind, if he has no concentration.'
4. "I considered thus: 'Whenever recluses or brahmins unpuri-
fied in bodily conduct resort to remote jungle-thicket resting
places in the forest, then owing to the defect of their unpurified
bodily conduct these good recluses and brahmins evoke
unwholesome fear and dread. But I do not resort to remote jun-
gle-thicket resting places in the forest unpurified in bodi~y con-
duct. I am purified in bodily conduct. I resort to remote Jung~e
thicket resting places in the forest as one of the noble ones WIth
bodily conduct purified.' Seeing in myself this purity of bodily
conduct, I found great solace in dwelling in the forest.