Homage to the Glorious Great Blissful One!
Thus did I hear at one time. The Blessed One was dwelling in the bhaga of
the vajra queen—the awakened body, speech, and mind of all thus-gone
ones. At that time, present among the assembly were the sky-dwelling,
earth-dwelling, and subterranean ḍākinīs. Smiling at these three, the Blessed
One gave this teaching on the secret topic:
With faith, compassion, and a one-pointed mind,
Fix your body and your speech; set your mind toward others’ benefit.
Endeavoring toward fearless yogic discipline,
With zeal for the profound path—listen well!
Ḍākinīs, to you I will explain
Your distinctive characteristics.
Sky dweller is the winds of the upper gate.
Earth dweller is the drops of the middle gate.
Subterranean dweller is the lower gate of śukra.
These three gates are awakened body, speech, and mind.
First, the distinctive characteristics of the sky-dwelling ḍākinī
Should be known as being of three types:
The physical wind, the cognitive wind,
And the wisdom wind, which has the quality of all.
To elaborate on this brief explanation in sequence:
The nondual wind is neither male nor female.
When in union, it is the wind of method and wisdom.
When it flows upward and enters, it is awakened body, speech, and mind.
It then spreads throughout the body: the heart, sacrum,
Mouth, throat, and navel.
The five families’ winds then abide all-pervasively.
The physical wind has four circulatory movements.
Divided into pure or defiled, there are a total of eight.
Each of these corresponds to one of eight three-hour periods.
Each three-hour period can be divided into two circulations.
The circulations of wind are sixteen in number.
Each circulation takes two hours.
In each hour, there are two daṇḍas.
In terms of the winds, the daṇḍas number sixty-four.
Similarly, there are thirty-two hours,
Which can be divided into twenty-one thousand six hundred and so forth.
These winds are a mix of mental and nonmental.
In its coarse and subtle aspects,
The wise should take hold of the mount of the mind,
The steed of the mind—concepts of grasper and grasped.
When these two—grasper and grasped—have ceased, the winds come to
rest at the center.
By itself, this is the wind of vajra wisdom.
When divided it has two aspects, method and wisdom.
It is the nature of the sky-dwelling ḍākinī.
This should be studied by those who know the pith instructions.
By means of their qualities, faults, and indications,
One must know the distinctive characteristics of the winds, [F.200.a]
Along with all their supports.
There is the “curved one” along with the one on the left.
These have the shape of a bow.
They are the paths of the physical wind.
Through the paths of direct sensory perceptions,
One should strive diligently to understand
The various geographical features —Mount Sumeru and the four continents;
The sun and moon in the north and west, orbiting to the south;
The cycling of method and wisdom, and so forth—
These are stabilized by the physical wind.
Due to the cataracts of ignorance,
The jewel of the mind has become stained.
This is the conceptual wind;
This wind is itself the path.
There are the right channel and left channel,
Their forms similar to a coiled snake.
For one who focuses on yoga,
The conceptual winds cease in their place.
Self-awareness, which is primordially unarisen,
Is itself the wind of vajra wisdom.
Supported by the channel in the center,
Caṇḍālī is like its chariot.
The domain of its activity is the wisdom of self-awareness.
One who strives to remain there will apprehend self-awareness.
Because the sky-dwelling ḍākinī has the nature of these winds,
They are themselves the vajra path.
Next, I will explain the earth-dwelling ḍākinī.
One who desires the wisdom of self-awareness
Should investigate the divisions of caṇḍālī.
First is the natural caṇḍālī.
Second is the inner heat caṇḍālī.
Third is the caṇḍālī of union.
Likewise, there is the naked caṇḍālī.
These categories are also subdivided as follows:
There are naked inner heat, extreme inner heat,
And the perfect inner heat of union with another.
These should be applied to all the above categories.
There are naked, very naked, very nakedly naked, and so forth;
All of these should be applied to each.
Divided, there are twelve aspects
And branches, forty-eight in number.
This is the nature of earth-dwelling ḍākinī,
Seventy-two thousand, and so forth.
Mere fierce fire produced from elsewhere
Is the antithesis of this subtle inner heat.
The tips of one hundred twenty hairs
And the tips of thirty-two hairs,
The five pairs and the three main ones:
The place where these three unite is the size of a mustard seed.
The relative widths of the central, right, and left,
And the twofold distinctions should all be known.
There are places where they naturally reside
As channels that are clear, and those that are impure.
Also, the channel knots, similar to letters: [F.200.b]
These are known as the primordial sound.
They are the nature of the earth-dwelling ḍākinī.
Learn their locations and so forth from other sources.
These instructions are a precious jewel;
Everything arises in dependence on them.
There are mistaken lineages, mistaken placements, and mistaken
measurements,
Shapes, colors, numbers, and so forth.
There is no attainment from mistakes.
The nature, which is free from those mistakes,
Is the attainment of the earth-dwelling ḍākinī.
She is the support for them all.
Next, the nature of the subterranean ḍākinī
Will be correctly and excellently explained.
There are three types of awakening mind.
The first is the suchness mind.
This is beyond the scope of expressible knowledge.
The second is the self-aware awakening mind.
Like a crystal, its appearance is conditioned.
The third is the physical awakening mind;
Sandalwood and camphor.
These are described in two ways: ultimate and conventional.
What moves by way of karmic winds and karmic fires
Is conventional awakening mind.
What moves by way of wisdom winds and wisdom fires
Is the ultimate awakening mind.
They have these stages, pure and impure.
They should be distinguished
Through shapes and through colors.
Not moving through the karmic winds,
Not burning through the karmic fires,
Its attributes are similar to snow;
The indestructible drop has the form of haṁ.
Like a jasmine-colored gem,
Glossy-white and resplendent,
It arises as the body of great bliss.
This is the ultimate awakening mind.
As for the red one, naturally clear,
There are four common distinctions.
These are wisdom, awakening mind,
And the two inferior ones, which are their opposites.
The latter two abide at the lower door; they give rise to cyclic existence
When they are spurred to movement through negative conditions.
Therefore, the attributes of the drops
Must be known in their ultimate and their conventional aspects.
There is no attainment from mistaken causes,
Nor, likewise, from mistaken conditions.
These can be known from the teacher’s words.
The ultimate is not an object engaged by the mind.
The conventional has the feeling of bliss as its object.
Its nature is the subterranean ḍākinī.
She is the unshakable meditation on the three vajras.
She, herself, is Vajrasattva.
The meaning of the letters, the branches, [F.201.a]
The condensed meanings, the general meaning,
The hidden meaning, and the ultimate meaning;
The varieties of conventional phenomena
Arise from the mind. Like a jewel and like a cymbal,
The varieties of ultimate phenomena
Arise on the basis of nonconceptual awareness.
The āli and kāli, along with the neuter phonemes,
Should be analyzed through these six modes.
The letter marking the final sound is inconceivable.
There are three types of branch:
Cause and result, signifier and signified,
And expression and expressed.
To briefly explain their opposites:
There are three vehicles; the rest is the mundane.
These should be understood as common.
These divisions should be known for oneself.
The hidden comprises the classifications of initiations and mantras.
There are four types of mantra and two kinds of initiation.
Dharmas are of two types, general and particular.
All these attributes
Should be known from the mouth of the guru.
The types of fit and unfit vessels
Should also be well analyzed by the guru.
When suchness is correctly realized,
There is no teacher, and nothing is taught.
Concentration and so forth become unceasing,
And buddhas arise in various forms.
They turn the various wheels of the Dharma,
Performing the twelve deeds and so forth.
For the lesser disciples, there is Action Tantra.
For the rest, there is Actionless Yoga.
After that, Yoga is also taught.
Inner yoga is for the rest.
After that there is Yoginī Tantra.
Using the churning stick of method and insight,
With the essence of wisdom at its tip,
The nondual awakened mind is churned;
From it comes nectar of twenty-four tastes.
This is known as the flow of precious jewels.
From this, all mundane and supramundane
Attainments will arise.
Just as unchurned milk
Will not give rise to what is desired,
Likewise, neither from many years of effort,
Nor suddenly, will attainments arise.
Therefore, there are twenty-four jewels,
Which taste like nectar and have the form of a lion.
Their sacred sites are also twenty-four,
Blessed by awakened body, speech, and mind.
Entrusted to twenty-four ḍākinīs,
They were sealed with four seals,
Carefully concealed and carefully disseminated.
If the seals are broken, the sacred vows are corrupted.
The natures of the mantras, visualized forms, and realizations [F.201.b]
Are the natures of awakened body, speech, and mind.
These are constantly misconstrued as having an essence.
There are two kinds of mantra, two kinds of realization.
Visualized forms should be similarly understood in two ways.
The classifications and the divisions
Of each should be learned from the guru.
Outer, inner, hidden, and final—
These are the four seals of all tantras.
This classification should be analyzed by the wise.
When these are understood,
The yogi possesses tantra,
And hindrances are transcended.
This is natural caṇḍālī.
There are twenty-four sacred sites,
Blessed by the three channels.
In these twenty-four sacred sites,
To twenty-four ḍākinīs, twenty-four tantras were entrusted:
Puru—very fierce secret vajra.
Jaru—fierce eye, the secret is severed.
Oru—the bright one not pervaded by thought.
Āru—the tip of the nose is equal to space.
Goru—teaching the great space of the intellect.
Raru—the body, speech, and mind of a dwarf.
Deru—Laṅka, jewel garland.
Maru—dark woods, great vow.
Karueru—great power.
Oru—terrifying secret wisdom.
Triru—powerful winds, wisdom garland.
Koru—beer is consumed, wisdom blazes.
Karuśyāma—garland of the moon.
Laru—blazing with wealth and appeal.
Karu—horse-ear, the wheel of the sun.
Herukhakha—victorious wisdom.
Preru—secret place of ḍākinīs’ strength.
Grīrukhaṇḍa—secret, blazing with fire.
Saurushoṇḍi—secret nectar.
Suru—the wheel ornamented with a cemetery.
Naru—very heroic victorious vajra.
Siru—great power and victorious wisdom.
Maru—this area confers victory over attachment.
Kuru—enthusiastic ḍākinīs assemble.
These are the places of entrustment; they should be sought out well.
Regarding inner caṇḍālī, twenty-four were entrusted.
The first is secret, as is the second.
These are the nature. Next comes empowerment.
Last is conditions. So it was said.
These are the specific natures of the ḍākinīs.
Any desired attainments will be bestowed.
One who wants the supreme attainments
Should receive initiation and sacred vows.
With horses, elephants and so forth,
One’s children and wife,
One’s wealth and jewels,
One should honor and serve the guru.
From ra and li, which are the taste of nectar,
One attains realization from the instructions of the guru;
Remember to hold them in mind!
Following this discourse, all the gathered assemblies that were present
rejoiced
Homage to noble Mañjuśrī, the youthful one.
Homage to the noble goddess, Tārā.
The tantra of The Arising of Tārā is an ocean of yogic practice.
Although its scripture and practice manual had declined and disappeared,
There was The Meditative Absorption of Tārā, chief among tantras.
Once that, too, became lost, this practice manual appeared.
For the sake of many beings, and as a compendium of the tantras
That elaborately teach the yogic practices,
Lokeśvāra, Lord of the World, taught this manual of practice.
Listen, all bodhisattvas!
This method that benefits all beings
Is based on seeing that the world is without refuge,
And tormented by the three types of suffering.
Receive this with great reverence!
In order to pacify the concepts of the world,
All buddhas teach this manual of practice.
On the holy Potala mountain, Mañjuśrī,
Padmapāṇi, Jaya,
Sarvanivaraṇaviṣkambhin, Sāgaramati,
Maitreya, and others —the full gathering —
All heard these words of the Dharma,
Rejoiced, and bowed their heads to the ground in veneration.
The children of the victorious ones mastered it and praised it;
They worshiped it with song, melody,
And various types of dance.
Yakṣas, rākṣasas, the world of ghosts,
Various maidens, the heavenly bodies,
Thunderbolt bearers, lords of the earth,
Nāga girls who live in the billowing seas
Where they cast coquettish glances,
The guardians of the nether world, and the daughters of the surasiddhas —
these all worshiped.
Gandharva queens with eye-catching breasts,
Female knowledge holders, kinnarīs,
Himavat’s daughters, as well as others, all spoke in this way:
“For us there is no refuge.
Yet this teaching of the Buddha is the refuge for those who have none.
Protector of those without a refuge, protector of the world, [F.30.a]
You engender bliss and great wonder about this teaching.”
The Lord, hearing these words of the assembly,
Pronounced the secret mantra, which he himself mastered,
And upon hearing this king of mantras, all the females there
Experienced numerous forms of the bliss of final buddhahood.
By the touch of the vajra their bodies released the juice,
And casting sidelong glances,
They impatiently stamped their feet on the ground.
Carried away by the bliss of passion, they let their juices flow.
May the Protector observe this and dispense
Timely words to these celestial girls —
The mantra of Kurukullā that enthralls wandering beings —
And the practice of painting in combination with this mantra.
When the Blessed One, the Protector of the World, had proclaimed his intent,
He, the Master of the World, began to teach the stages of the ritual:
The method for creating an image of Kurukullā,
The mere painting of which
Brings fruition to the practitioner,
I will now explain in full.
Who can create the picture?
On which day of the month and at which hour?
That I shall now explain
In accordance with the prescriptions of The Arising of Tārā.
The one who paints the picture
Should have reddish eyes,
As well as red hands and feet,
Eyes like those of a bird, and the legs of a black antelope.
It is such a person who shall draw the Savioress.
In the first month of spring,
On the eighth day of Caitra,
Halfway through the second watch—
This is when the eyes of Tārā should be drawn.
The artist must eat the three sweets
And abstain from fish, meat, and alcohol.
Always dressed in red,
He must be smeared with a red fragrant paste.
Having brought forth a mind of loving-kindness,
He should bathe at dawn in a sanctified location.
Then, having changed into a garment of three pieces,
He should correctly draw The Enchantress:
Single-faced, with elongated eyes,
Four-armed and of the color of kunkuma,
Sixteen years old and displaying an amorous sentiment,
And puffed up with pride on account of her magical feminine charm.
The canvas should be woven with thread spun by a female of fair
complexion. Both she and the weaver should eat milk-porridge.
Upon a lotus seat, wearing an upper garment of red cloth, jewel earrings,
and a jewel diadem, [F.30.b] she displays the mudrā granting fearlessness
with her lower right hand, and with her second right hand holds an arrow
that she draws to the tip of her ear. In her upper left hand she holds a bow,
and in the second left, a red utpala. Crowned by Amitābha, dwelling in a
cave in the mountains, she is Kurukullā.
Below Kurukullā is Rāhu, and above him, Kāmadeva with his spouse.
Above Kāmadeva there is a moon disk, and upon the moon disk a red lotus
seat. On this seat one must paint the Blessed Lady with all her beautiful
features, and then consecrate her image. In front of the painting, from the
eighth through the full moon day, one should perform the eighteenfold pūjā,
and recite the mantra. This is the heart essence of Tārā:
oṃ kurukulle hrīḥ hūṃ svāhā
This is the mantra. Having done the preliminary propitiation consisting of
one hundred thousand recitations, next, on a buddha-day in the month of
Kārttika, Vaiśakha, or Āṣāḍha, having bathed at dawn and observed the
restoration of vows ceremony, the practitioner should offer a complete pūjā.
He should present a feast for the congregation of listeners, and next offer
a feast with gifts for the community of those practicing the secret mantra of
the Great Vehicle. Placing his right knee on the ground, and with his robe
thrown over one shoulder, he should receive the desired accomplishments.
He should salute and ask the pardon of the saṅgha of listeners and the
community of those who delight in the Great Vehicle.
Having gone to the place where the painting of the Blessed Lady is
displayed, this knowledge holder should, for the sake of the desired
accomplishments, enter meditation and recite the mantra one hundred
thousand times for each of its syllables.
With the first third, insight increases;
With the second third, enthrallment is achieved;
And with the final third,
The person will also neutralize poison.
By mad and haughty women, and by the entire world,
This practitioner will be honored.
Because of familiarity with the practice, this mantra holder [F.31.a]
May do as he wishes with beautiful goddesses.
The mere sound of his name will cause those of incomparable poison to flee,
And even those as brilliant as the leader of the hooded will become just like a
fish.
Those who engage in recitation, by means of their power of speech,
Render speechless even the experts who possess the majestic power of
spells.
Holders of mantra, who ride elephants and horses,
Embraced by their beautiful consorts who clasp their necks —
These are conquered by the power of the best among mantra-adepts.
Their minds partake of the pleasures of perfect kingdoms.
Rati from Kāmadeva and Pārvatī from Śiva;4
Similarly, Śrī from Nārāyaṇa, Śacī from Ākhaṇḍala,
The white Amalagīśvariṇī from Vācaspati, and Lakṣmī from the Sustainer of
the Earth—
These they win by means of the mantra.
Those who possess the mantra and meditate on the Blessed Lady
Will gain various treasures, gold, silver, earrings,
Garments, and other such wealth.
Their minds will partake of whatever they wish for, without exception.
Having taken the kingdom from the king, the fruit from the tree that
transcends the senses,
And the waters from the nāgas, rivers, and oceans,
Absorbed in the mantra, they drink and eat while purifying through the
mantra.
For people without the mantra, no enjoyment can be won.
Wild elephants; the best horses of noble breed;
The best snakes, hooded and venomous;
Crocodiles; water buffalo; and rhinoceroses —
These they summon by the power of their mantra.
If also they look with eyes free from wonder,
The mantra-adepts will thereby see.
If with the eye of compassion mantra-adepts regard the world,
Which is stricken by all sorts of suffering,
They will become Tārā, benefiting the world like the wish-fulfilling jewel.5
The entire world will become of Tārā and know peace.6
Having overcome the demons, they bring down a rain of wealth;
As a wish-fulfilling tree, they grant beings whatever they wish for. [F.31.b]
Having drawn to them all the riches of the lords of wealth without
exception,
They give it away for the benefit of all beings.
Likewise, for the benefit of the destitute in the world
Tārā creates clothes, seats, homes, and parasols.
For those suffering on islands, due to the wreckage of their merchant
vessels,
Tārā creates boats, ships, and so on.
The yogins who meditate on this Tārā
Will first experience some suffering.
Yet once that is over, such people
Will soon discover feasts.
Next they will acquire garments,
Just as they will meet with noble women.
Then they will enjoy the betel.
That which they wish for will be obtained without asking.
Even if one is celibate,
One may engage with a woman of supreme, celestial birth.
Those who take pleasure in killing sentient beings
Will not succeed in this discipline.
Those who delight in the ten virtues,
And are single-minded in their devotion to the Great Vehicle,
Will, in accordance with Vajradharma’s words,
Hereby experience the supreme accomplishment.
Homage to the Glorious Vajraḍākinī!
I pay homage to the protector of beings, Glorious Vajraḍākinī,
Universal sovereign of the ḍākinīs, the very essence of the five wisdoms and
three bodies.
I pay homage to all the vajraḍākinīs
Who cut the bonds of conceptual thought and descend to act in the world.
Now, following that, I will explain the tantra called The Supreme Secret of the
Secret Goddesses, the Vajraḍākinīs. 
She pervades the entire Egg of Brahmā, the animate and inanimate.
She is the source of all goddesses and rules over Brahmā and the rest.
She is their great secret, the great Queen Mahāmāyā.
She is the great illusion, intensely fierce, who destroys all that exists. 
She pervades all of this: the animate and inanimate, the three worlds.
Time after time she gathers in and again emanates the triple world.
This mother of the guhyakas is celebrated as the essence of illusion.
She is the knowledge that perfects the three worlds and fulfills all desires.
Through the mere thought of the queen of the accomplished, knowledge
itself,
The devas, dānavas, gandharvas, yakṣas, āsuras, and humans,
The vidyādharas, the kinnaras, and mahodaras,
The rākṣasas and piśācas —all are mastered for practitioners.
All creatures are subdued: those born in the water and on land.
Phenomena are naturally luminous; they are primordially pure and without
stain.
The methods of those possessing the self-arisen five wisdoms are to be
praised;24
These are the yoginīs, the mother of yoga, and the entirety of the three
worlds.25
The entire play of illusion is accomplished without exclusion or remainder.26
Abducted from the buddhas, the maidens of the highest gods are enjoyed.
The yogī has knowledge, masters yoga, and weaves Indra’s Web.27
He beguiles and paralyzes, slays, dissuades, and more.
He tames, magnetizes, and so forth; he flies through the sky.
He enters the citadel of another, is invisible, and so on.
He causes hostility, renders mute, and moves under the earth;
Becomes the universal sovereign of vidyādharas, does not age, and is
deathless.
One with knowledge of yogic illusion is likewise free from disease —
Yogīs revel in the form of the mantra’s syllables. [F.168.a]
Through recitation and contemplation, meditation and absorption, [508]
The vidyā created through recitation brings about the accomplishment of
knowledge.28
Without discipline or austerities, without hardship, fasting, or vows,
Bliss and Joy bring accomplishment through constancy in knowledge and
method.29
The Virile One stands in the center of the navel, in the hidden space of the
blossom;
He is mind, the absence of mind, and mental form—the nature of knowledge
and what can be known.
I will now describe him—this is the profound instruction of the Buddha:
A chain equal to that of the āli kāli is coiled there.
The upper chain ignites and is made to flow downward,
A drop of nectar flowing in the form of semen.
Whatever comes on the path of the senses is naturally just that.
Through the practice of supreme benefit all becomes the nature of the
Buddha.30
The spiritual attainment of the great commitment is the perfection of the
great pill.31
In the embrace of Mahāmāyā you should practice yogic union.32
Endowed with the five offerings together with the five objects of desire,
The power of accomplishment will be known and spiritual attainment made
permanent.
I will explain this spiritual attainment of wisdom,
By which the state of a god is swiftly attained—Goddess, I speak truthfully!
To you, Mahāmāyā, I will explain the accomplishment of the three worlds,
The garland of syllables of the most excellent among the great yoginīs.33
The great yogī who masters the animate and inanimate with thought alone
Is constantly offered desirable things and served according to his pleasure.
He is always at play and accomplishes the vajra yoginīs. [509]
In a variety of forms the essential practice is revealed. [F.168.b]
The great attainment, the splendor of the tathāgatas, is granted;34
Through extracting various essences the yogī constantly benefits beings.35
With the collected semen, liquor, and extracted large pill,
He mixes in the great flesh and unites with the yoginī.
He gains long life, great virility, great splendor, and becomes exceedingly
powerful;
36
He possesses divine sight, magical ability, and drinks the moon day after
day;
He becomes long-lived so that he lives for a great age;
He manifests an alluring form and conjures miracles;
With merely a thought his appearance is transformed—
The queen of vidyās, the great enchantress, is unfailingly accomplished
through recitation.
Vidyā! In the three worlds there is nothing equal to my knowledge.37
This transmission of all tantras has been explained to you, Magnificent One!
Now, following that, I will explain the sublime secret syllable that bestows
the result of the spiritual attainment for the practice of the great queens of
yoga.
Merely visualizing her, the yoginī grants the best of things.
Apply the first syllable and sustain the upward breath.38
Taking that which comes at the end of the eight together with ū and the
bindu,
The yogī moves the downward breath, abandoning the real and unreal. [510]
The observances are not explained: the activities of the garland mantra,
Of retention, and of fire offerings are all omitted.39
The threefold practice is said to be essentially mantra, appearance, and
reality.
Through three aspects of wisdom he will not be stained by the faults of
existence.
The yogī who constantly meditates on this without interruption
Is equal to Vajrasattva and gains accomplishment in a single month. [F.169.a]
Meditate upon the first syllable which is the color of Indra.
Merged fully with one’s own awareness it is summoned in an instant.
The one possessing the second syllable is imagined and cultivated.
One gains power over everything within the whole of the three worlds.
Brahmā, and lord Viṣṇu, so too Indra and the Lord of Desire —
Invoked with the wisdom syllable, they are summoned along with their
wives.
Endowed with the syllable ā, settled in awakened body, speech, and mind,41
Perform the threefold union—this is the supreme extraction of the pill.
Possessing the syllable khe is the four-faced one with a red body.42
Skull cup in hand he is passion itself—this is the supreme extraction of
semen.
Possessing the syllable ci is one yellow in color who shines brightly,
With the form of a horse’s face —engaging him is the supreme extraction of
the liquor.
The one possessing the syllable ra is red in color and exceedingly bright,
Has four arms and four faces, and appears in the form of a jackal.
Cultivating this wrathful mind is the supreme extraction of blood.
Endowed with the six syllables, they are fixed in the six places.
The practice, the host of ḍākinīs, and the vajra yoginīs are accomplished,
The two eyes, the ears, and so too the nose and the mind.
Yogīs take the posture of a sporting lion;43
While meditating with the movement of breath controlled, it blazes in an
instant
Throughout Akaniṣṭha, the summit of existence, and in the seven worlds of
the animate and inanimate.
All meditate upon it, but they don’t realize it.
If everyone realized it, the manifestations of beings would utterly collapse.
Therefore this wisdom is secret, obscure, and unwritten.
Because the awakened ones know, they who are immersed in yogic sleep,44
They concentrate upon the pill and meditate on the singular nature of forms.
They meditate on the essence of the substances arisen from the nine doors,45
And consume them with a mind free of concepts and devoid of intrinsic
nature.
With the thumb and ring finger, place the wish-granting jewel in the mouth,
And attain the everlasting spiritual attainment arisen from the nature of the
nectar.
Now comes a thorough explanation of the supreme accomplishment of the
samaya:
The ingestion of the other gathered substances that bestow the result of
omniscience.
By their mere consumption the mothers of the spirits are accomplished:
Elephant and horse, and so too cow and dog.
Mixed with the great one and also the five wisdom nectars,
From the fourteenth to the eighth they are combined and mingled together.
Left inside a jackal for seven days, remove them.
Roll the five into pellets the size of mustard seeds.
Indeed this tantra teaches that from the eighth to the fourteenth
Cultivate them individually for seven days, mix them, and place them in a
jackal.48
Take them out—from the five make pellets the size of the fruit of spiritual
attainment.
Because the great fruition is perfectly realized, it is taught in this tantra but
fully concealed;
The buddhas have concealed the great fruition in every instance.
Next follows the method of practice: visualize a mind lotus
Glowing red in color and endowed with the four goddesses.
It is adorned with the figure of the Buddha.
In the east he shines like a blue lotus, to the south he is yellow,
To the west whitish red, and in the north he glows emerald.
Shrouded in a garland of flames, he is beautiful with three eyes, four faces,
and four arms.
Imagine that the goddess in the east has three eyes and holds a khaṭvāṅga
and bell in her left hands and a vajra and skull cup in her right hands. The
goddess in the south wields a trident, a jewel, a banner, and a jackal. The
goddess in the west holds a bow, an arrow, a multicolored lotus, and a skull
cup. The goddess in the north wields a sword, a noose, a hand
drum, and a skull cup.
In its center visualize the vajra body, speech, and mind
Bearing a skull cup and khaṭvāṅga, and so too a bow and arrow.
Meditating on that which possesses the first mantra, it blazes for an instant.
Practicing like this, the yogī is granted the spiritual attainment of the
substance. 
Through the accomplishment of the yoginī, confidence swiftly develops.50
One can become entirely invisible and manifest a thousandfold at once.51
Plunder from the buddhas and enjoy sublime celestial girls.52
With vajra eyes one will see, like an āmalaka fruit in the palm of one’s hand.
Buddhas equal to grains of sand in the Gaṅgā residing in their vajra
realms,53
Pure realms numerous as sand in the Gaṅgā, the features of awakened body,
speech, and mind,54
The intrinsic condition of all objects —know them to arise from the mind’s
dance.55
Apply the syllables in reverse and meditate on the mantra.
Ingest each one of the pills infused with the vajra drink.
Take the last of the eight syllables together with the ū and bindu;
Fix it firmly at the end and clearly pronounce the mantra: guhya bhakṣa abhakṣe
hūṁ.56
In perfect union with the yoginī take possession of the first syllable.
If desiring accomplishment through the vajra holder, a yogī consumes the
manifest mantra seven times.
The last of the three syllables sits clearly at the end of the eight.
Endowed with the ū and bindu it remains as the supreme syllable.
The one linked to the first syllable is united with hrīḥ.
Apply the last of the syllables and fix in place the five seeds.
Meditate upon the syllable and cause the lotus to fully bloom.
For those who seek the accomplishment of a vajra holder, this union should
be fully known.
Then, the sublime vajra song which is the realization of the vajra yoginīs
welcomes the one who thoroughly accomplishes existence:57
“Hey, friend! The vajra makes the lotus swell and bloom.
A la la la la ho! You have been aroused by the dance of great bliss.
The rays of the sun fully open the face of the lotus. [514]
You have become aroused by the dance of great bliss.”58
Then, simply through this song sung to the great vajra holder
The vajraḍākinīs dance and call out to Vajrasattva.
In this way one with consistent devotion gains the spiritual attainment of
union.
Through perfect union in the four times, accomplishment is gained—this is
the supreme meditation.
Adorned with all perfect ornaments and wreathed with flowers and
perfume,
So the spiritual attainment that bestows the sublime three bodies is certainly
attained,
Causing its perfect illumination within a hundred miles.
From the perfect application of the two powers arise the substances of the
nine doors.
One will accomplish the unsurpassable essence, the peace of abiding in the
awakening of buddhahood.
Now, in verse form:
The forms, the seals, and the attributes,
The substances, absorptions, and meditations —
These various ritual methods have been set forth,
Taught according to the desires of the goddess’s mind.
Whoever keeps this tantra at home, keeps it with him always, and chants
and meditates upon it will no longer experience illness, aging, obstacles, or
death. He will be forever protected from obstacles by the queens among
yoginīs
